Database -Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP) http://www.ucdp.uu.se/gpdatabase/gpcountry.php?id=3&regionSelect=1... 


Program Overview 
Publications 


Datasets 



Charts and Graphs 
Definitions 


F.A.Q. 


World Map 
Africa 
Americas 
Northern Americas 
Central Americas 
Southern Americas 
Asia 
Central and Southern Asia 
Eastern Asia 
Europe 
Western Europe 
Eastern Europe 
Middle East 
Oceania 


Algeria 

For up to date information on the situation in relation to the Arabian 
Spring see Additional info. 

After Algeria was integrated intoFrance in the 19th century an 
increasing number of European settlers gradually established 
political, economic, and social domination over the native Algerian 
population. Among the disadvantaged native Algerians nationalist 
sentiments grew and in 1954, FLN (Front de Libération Nationale; 
National Liberation Front), later joined by the MNA (Mouvement 
National Algérien; Algerian National Movement), engaged in an 
extra-state conflict against France. The two rival groups also started 
fighting each other with the FLN succeeding in taking the lead in the 
pro-independence movement. When finally France opened peace-
negotiations in 1961, the OAS (Organisation de l'Armée Secrète; 
Secret Army Organization) formed by members of the French Army 
violently attempted to disrupt the peace process. Despite this 
intra-state conflict in France, Algeria was granted independence in 
1962. 

One year later, in 1963, neighbouring Morocco occupied the mineral rich Algerian province of Tindouf, but was soon pushed back by 
Algerian troops in a short inter-state conflict. Subsequently, Morocco recognised the Algerian border in exchange for joint 
mineral exploitation in Tindouf. 

The former pro-independence movement FLN established asocialist one-party rule in newly independent Algeria that came 
to last for 27 years. In the 1980s,the Algerian government faced growing dissatisfaction among the population caused by 
economic hardships contrasting with the privileges of the political elite. Moreover, Islamic groups mobilised, encouraged by 
the success of Islamist movements in other countries. Finally, the Algerian President Chadli Bendjedid introduced a 
multi-party system. However, when an Islamist political party, FIS (Front islamique du salut, Islamic Salvation Front) won 
the majority of the votes in the parliamentary elections held in 1991, the Algerian army staged acoup and cancelled the 
second round of elections. Subsequently, the country gradually descended into a large-scale intra-state conflict that 
continued into the 21st century. The various groups confronting the government shared the aim of establishing an Islamic 
state in Algeria. Two of them, GSPC (Groupe Salafite pour la prédication et la combat; Salafist Group for Preaching and 
Combat), which changed its name toAQIM (Qaida al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Maghrib al-Islami, al-Qaeda Organisation in the 
Islamic Maghreb) in early 2007, and GIA (Groupe Islamique Armé; Armed Islamic Group) frequently made use of 
one-sided violence during the conflict. 

Since 1946 Algeria has experienced the extra-state,inter-state, intra-state, non-state and one-sided categories of UCDP 
organised violence. 


World 


Region 


Country 

War & minor conflict 
Non-state conflict 
One-sided violence 
Peace agreement 
Additional info 

TimelineArabian spring 
BackgroundArabian spring 

Please alwayscite: Uppsala Conflict Data Program (Date of retrieval: yy/mm/dd) UCDP Conflict Encyclopedia: www.ucdp.uu.se/database, UppsalaUniversity 
Department of Peace and Conflict Research |conflictdatabase@pcr.uu.se 

1 of 1 6/26/2013 12:25 AM 


